Now let's talk a little bit about SQL Server high availability with
Windows Failover Clustering and with Kubernetes clusters.
First,
let's get an idea of some of the basics of Windows Failover
Clustering when it's used to a SQL Server.
Windows Failover Clustering is built into both the
main editions of Windows Server,
which is Windows Server Standard and Windows Server Enterprise editions.
It basically provides protection from unplanned downtime.
So if the services on one node fail,
another node can take over those services and run them,
continuing the production application.
What it does not do is it does not provide added scalability.
So you cannot use Windows Failover Clusters to increase
the scalability of your applications.
It does provide automatic failover in the case of a server failure,
and that is what it's primarily designed to protect,
a server‑level failure.
It does allow for multi‑node clusters.
You can have multi‑site clusters so clusters can span geographic
regions for disaster recovery and data protection.
Normally, with SQL Server, a cluster requires shared storage.
It is possible to create Windows Server Failover
Clusters without shared storage.
But for applications like SQL Server where a database is involved,
shared storage is a requirement.
Applications must be cluster‑aware.
So when you go to install your application and it's going
to use Windows Failover Clustering,
that application has to be specifically designed to
be able to take over a cluster, and SQL Server is one of those applications.
We'll see a little bit more about that in just a second.
The failover process is completely transparent to client applications.
So sometimes there is a delay, as we'll talk about in a few minutes,
in the failover process.
But apart from that,
clients can seamlessly reconnect and not even be
aware that there was a failover.
And this can be implemented at the physical level,
but it can also be implemented for virtual machines.
It's often implemented for virtual machine hosts to
provide host‑level protection,
but you can also create Windows Failover Clusters at the
guest level for VM guests as well.
So if you go to install SQL Server on a Windows Failover Cluster,
you can see that there are a couple different options here.
The first callout here points to installing a standalone version of SQL Server.
You can do this if you're installing one instance of SQL Server.
This is also the option that you use if you're installing
SQL Server for a Kubernetes cluster.
On the second callout,
you can see this is the installation option that you use for
installing SQL Server to a Windows Failover Cluster.
So these are different options,
and they perform different types of installations for SQL Server.
Now let's talk a little bit more specifically about how Windows
Failover Clustering and SQL Server works.
A Windows Failover Cluster can consist of 2 nodes up to 64 nodes.
When it's used with SQL Server,
there are a few limitations that you need to be aware of.
The SQL Server Standard edition only supports two‑node clusters.
You need to use the SQL Server Enterprise edition if you
want support for more than two nodes.
The nodes in a Windows Failover Cluster are connected
together using an internal network. Each node sends out a
heartbeat to show that it's active.
If a node does not have a heartbeat,
then that node is considered offline, and a failover will occur.
The latency of the heartbeat can be adjusted to allow the nodes to be
geographically dispersed in different regions of the country that
have higher latencies. To support SQL Server, the Windows Failover
Cluster needs to provide shared storage where the SQL Server database
is going to reside.
This storage is typically on an external SAN,
but it can also be on a file share.
This storage must be able to be accessed by all the
different nodes in the cluster.
Client systems don't directly access individual nodes in the cluster.
Instead, when the cluster is created, you make a virtual cluster host.
That host has its own IP address, which can be static or dynamically assigned.
Clients connect to that virtual host using your external network.
The cluster's virtual host directs the clients to the primary node
that's running the services that that client needs.
In the event of a server failure,
the cluster will failover to one of the secondary servers.
For SQL Server, the length of time that the failover requires depends
largely on the activity level of the server and the number of uncommitted
transactions and the processing power of the server involved. For a lightly
loaded system, this can take just a few seconds. For a heavily loaded,
enterprise‑level workload, the failover can take many minutes. To account
for this kind of delay, many businesses include retry logic in their
applications to make sure the clients can seamlessly reconnect following a failover.